.. |H2O| replace:: :math:`{\rm{H}}_2{\rm{O}}`\
.. |CH2| replace:: :math:`{\rm{CH}}_2`\
.. |CH3| replace:: :math:`{\rm{CH}}_3`\
.. |CH4| replace:: :math:`{\rm{CH}}_4`\
.. |H2| replace:: :math:`{\rm{H}}_2`\
.. |CO2| replace:: :math:`{\rm{CO}}_2`\
.. |O2| replace:: :math:`{\rm{O}}_2`\
.. |CO| replace:: :math:`{\rm{CO}}`\
.. |CH| replace:: :math:`{\rm{CH}}`\
.. |OH| replace:: :math:`{\rm{OH}}`\
.. |O| replace:: :math:`{\rm{O}}`\
.. |H| replace:: :math:`{\rm{H}}`\
.. |C| replace:: :math:`{\rm{C}}`\
.. |Rj| replace:: :math:`R_j`\

Generating an Input File
========================

The first step for any kinetic model is to properly generate an input
file. Input files are processed by a "parser" class of CatMAP. The job
of the parser is to convert some standard input into a Python data
structure compatible with the kinetic model. The default parser is the
TableParser which has been designed to accept inputs in a tabular
format. This tutorial is designed to explain how users can create their
own input files for any model which uses the TableParser (currently the
only "parser" class implemented). If users are interested in creating
inputs in some other format then it is also possible to design custom
"parser" classes, but this is advanced and will not be discussed further
here.

The tutorial is broken into two parts: an :ref:`overview <overview>` of
input file structure and an :ref:`example <example>` of how to create an
input file for methane synthesis on :math:`{\rm{Rh}}(111)` from DFT.

.. _overview:

Input File Overview
-------------------

File Structure
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The TableParser accepts inputs in a tab-separated text file. An example
of the header and first few lines are provided below:

::

    surface_name    site_name   species_name  formation_energy    bulk_structure  frequencies reference
    None            gas         CH4             0                   None            []          By Definition
    None            gas         H2O             0                   None            []          By Definition
    None            gas         H2              0                   None            [4401]      By Definition
    None            gas         CO              2.74                None            [2170]      Energy Environ. Sci., 3, 1311-1315 (2010)
    Pt              211         CO              1.113               fcc             []          J. Phys. Chem. C, 113 (24), 10548-10553 (2009)

(Note that spaces instead of tab characters have been used here for
readability. A functional input file should have fields separated by 1
tab character).

The first line provides the titles for all columns. Note that *column
order does not matter* but *header names do matter*. In other words, you
could put the "site\_name" column before the "surface\_name" column, but
you could not call the "site\_name" column "site\_labels". The following
column titles are *required for a functional input file*:

-  surface\_name
-  site\_name
-  species\_name
-  formation\_energy
-  frequencies
-  reference

Any number of other input columns may be added but they will be ignored
by default (like the "bulk\_structure" column in this example). Details
on how to parse in additional data will be covered in a future tutorial.

The text input files can be generated by using LibreOffice, Excel, or
other spreadsheet programs by creating a spreadsheet with the
appropriate columns and exporting as a tab separated value.
Alternatively they can fairly easily be generated within Python or other
programming languages.

Field Values
~~~~~~~~~~~~

A brief explanation of the inputs for each field is provided below. Some
references are made to the ReactionModel attributes which are used to
decide which fields are parsed in. If you have not yet read the other
documentation some of this might not make sense at first, but after
working through other examples it should be more clear.

surface\_name
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This is the name of the surface to which a species is adsorbed. The
names are arbitrary, but only names which appear in the "surface\_names"
attribute of the ReactionModel will be parsed in. The only special value
is "None" which will be parsed in regardless of whether or not it
appears in the "surface\_names" attribute. This is typically used for
gas-phase species.

site\_name
^^^^^^^^^^

These names are used to distinguish different site types. They can
correspond to a facet ("111" or "211") or be more specific ("hcp", "fcc"
or "top"). Gas-phase species should have the site defined as "gas".
Site names which appear in the {
{species\_definitions[site]['site\_names']}} list will be parsed in,
where "site" is the designation of any site in the model.

species\_name
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The names of the adsorbates, transition-states, and gasses are defined
here. In principle an arbitrary string can be used (e.g. "methoxy") but
it is often practical to use a chemical formula (e.g. CH3O) since the
composition of such strings can be automatically determined (the ASE
function ase.atoms.strings2symbols is used). If the name cannot be
parsed by ase.atoms.strings2symbols then the atomic composition must be
manually specified in the {species\_definitions[species\_name]['composition']}
dictionary. For example:

``species_definitions['methoxy']['composition'] = {'C':1,'H':3,'O':1}``

Only species which appear in the "species\_names", "gas\_names", and
"transition\_state\_names" attributes of the ReactionModel will be
parsed. These attributes are typically specified automatically by the
"rxn\_expressions" strings, so if, for some reason, you want to parse in
a species which is not in the reaction network you can do so by adding a
"dummy" reaction like "CO\_g -> CO\_g" to have the model parse in the
energetics of gas-phase CO.

formation\_energy
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This is the core of the input file since it defines the energetics of
the system. It should be the "generalized formation energy" (see
:ref:`Formation Energy Approach <formation_energy>`) of the "species\_name" on the "surface\_name" and
"site\_name". These energies are usually very hard to come by, and must be
computed by an electronic structure method such as DFT, or in some cases they
can be measured experimentally. It is extremely important that all energies
share a
common thermodynamic reservoir for each atomic constituent (see :ref:`Formation
Energy Approach <formation_energy>`).

frequencies
^^^^^^^^^^^

This is a list of the vibrational frequencies of the "species\_name" on
the "surface\_name" at the "site\_name". Although this field is
required, it is possible to input an empty list "[]" if the vibrational
frequencies are not known. The vibrational frequencies are used to
compute the zero-point and free energy corrections for gas phase and
adsorbed species. By default the units are assumed to be "wavenumbers"
or "cm^-1", but this can be changed by editing the
"frequency\_unit\_conversion" variable (1.239842e-4 by default) so that
input\_frequency\*frequency\_unit\_conversion = input\_frequency [eV].
Gas-phase vibrational frequencies can be found in NIST (be careful since
redundant frequencies are listed only once) and some are compiled in the
catmap.data.experimental\_gas\_frequencies dictionary. Vibrational
frequencies of adsorbed species can be costly to compute, and hence a
few approximations are sometimes employed. These approximations are
controlled by the "estimate\_frequencies" attribute of the TableParser.
The values, in order of increasing accuracy, are:

-  estimate\_frequencies >3: Use empty frequency set for species without
   any frequencies specified.
-  estimate\_frequencies >= 3: Use frequencies of atomic species (e.g.
   :math:`\nu_{CH_4}` = :math:`\nu_C` + :math:`4*\nu_H` where :math:`\nu_X` is a Python list of the
   vibrational species of species X adsorbed)
-  estimate\_frequencies >= 2: Estimate frequency of transition-states
   from the dissociated state frequency (e.g. :math:`\nu_{C-O}` = :math:`\nu_C` + :math:`\nu_O`)
-  estimate\_frequencies >= 1: Estimate frequency of adsorbed state at
   one site using frequency from other sites (e.g. :math:`\nu_{CO(111)}` =
   :math:`\nu_{CO(211)}` )
-  estimate\_frequencies = 0: Only accept frequencies from the exact
   adsorbate on the correct site. However, a single set of frequencies
   will still be used for all surfaces. If the attribute
   "frequency\_surface\_names" is defined then an average of the
   frequencies from the surface(s) in this list will be used. Otherwise
   an average of all available frequencies for each adsorbate will be
   used. For example, to use only Cu vibrational frequencies set
   {{frequency\_surface\_names = ['Cu']}}, or to average Cu and Pt
   vibrational frequencies use {{frequency\_surface\_names = ['Cu',
   'Pt']}}. Allowing frequencies to vary with site would require a way
   of estimating frequency as a function of descriptors and is not
   currently implemented.

reference
^^^^^^^^^

This is an arbitrary string which notes the source of the information.
Usually a publication/citation is provided for previously computed work,
or for your own input you could use "Unpublished", "This work",
"DFT/GPAW/RPBE", etc. This is used when generating a summary file for
the model, and it is always good practice to note the source of inputs.

.. _formation_energy:

Formation Energy Approach
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

One key point for generating input files is that the energies are
computed as a "generalized formation energy" relative to a *common
reference*:

:math:`E_i = U_i - \sum_j (n_j R_j)`

where :math:`E_i` is the "generalized formation energy" of species :math:`i`, :math:`U_i` is the
raw/DFT energy of species :math:`i`, :math:`nj` is the number of atomic species :math:`j` in :math:`i`,
and :math:`\left|R_j\right|` is the reference energy of that atomic species. Mathematically
this looks a little confusing (especially with such crude notation) but
in practice it is pretty easy. For example, say we want to find the
energy of gas-phase CO relative to carbon (C) in methane (|CH4|), oxygen
(O) in |H2O|, and hydrogen (H) in molecular hydrogen (|H2|). We first
compute the reference energies (:math:`\left|R_j\right|`) for each atomic species:


.. math::

    R_{\rm{H}} &= 0.5(U_{\rm{H}_2}) \\
    R_{\rm{C}} &= U_{\rm{CH_4}} - 4R_{\rm{H}} \\
    R_{\rm{O}} &= U_{\rm{H_2O}} - 2R_{\rm{H}} \\

(where again U is a "raw" energy from an ab-initio calculation, or a
"regular" formation energy from NIST).

Now we can compute the "generalized formation energy" of CO as:

:math:`E_{\rm{CO}} = U_{\rm{CO}} - R_{\rm{C}} - R_{\rm{O}}`

In the case where CO is adsorbed to a surface, say Pt(211), we can
compute a "generalized" formation energy relative to the clean surface:

:math:`E_{{\rm{CO}}*@{\rm{Pt}}(211)} = U_{{\rm{Pt}}(211)+{\rm{CO}}*} - U_{{\rm{Pt}}(211)} - R_{\rm{C}} - R_{\rm{O}}`

One nice thing about the formation energy approach is that it does not
distinguish between thermodynamic minima (adsorbed states) and saddle
points (transition-states). Thus, it is possible to compute a formation
energy of the :math:`{\rm{C-O}}` dissociation transition-state on :math:`{\rm{Pt}}(211)` as:

:math:`E_{{\rm{C-O}}@{\rm{Pt}}(211)} = U_{{\rm{Pt}}(211)+{\rm{C-O}}} - U_{{\rm{Pt}}(211)} - R_{\rm{C}} - R_{\rm{O}}`

Then one could compute the barrier for :math:`{\rm{C-O}}` dissociation as:

:math:`E_{{\rm{C-O}}@{\rm{Pt}}(211)} - E_{{\rm{CO}}*@{\rm{Pt}}(211)}`

If this still doesn't make sense, try working through the
`example <#example>`__ below.

In principle the choice of reference species is arbitrary since the
reference energies :math:`|R_j|` cancel out in any relative quantities. However, in
many cases it is necessary to use some correction scheme for the
gas-phase energies if they are poorly described by the level of theory
used (e.g. DFT). In this case it is best to select a reference set for
which the reference species are well-described by the level of theory.
For example, it is well-known that |O2| and |CO2| are not properly described
by DFT, so it would not make sense to use these to compute the reference
energies :math:`|R_j|`.

It is also worth re-iterating that the *same reference energies* :math:`|R_j|` *must
be used for all energies in a given input file*. One can usually see
which gas-phase species are used as references since their formation
energies will be 0 by definition (see :ref:`overview <overview>`).

.. _example:

Example
-------

In this example we will generate an input file for methane synthesis
from :math:`{\rm{CO}}` and |H2| (methanation) on Rh(111) using some previously computed
DFT values and a Python script. You can copy-paste the code as you go
along, or find the whole script at `GitHub <https://github.com/ajmedford/catmap/blob/master/tutorials/1-generating_input_file/generate_input.py>`_.

Take the simplified methanation reaction mechanism:

-  :math:`{\rm{CO}}_{\rm{gas}} + * \rightarrow {\rm{CO}}*`
-  :math:`{\rm{CO}}* + * \rightarrow {\rm{C}}* + {\rm{O}}*`
-  :math:`{\rm{O}}* + {\rm{H}}* \leftrightarrow {\rm{OH}}*` (quasi-equilibrated)
-  :math:`{\rm{OH}}* + {\rm{H}}* \rightarrow {\rm{H}}_2{\rm{O}}_{\rm{gas}} + 2*`
-  :math:`{\rm{C}}* + {\rm{H}}* \rightarrow {\rm{CH}}* + *`
-  :math:`{\rm{CH}}* + {\rm{H}}* \leftrightarrow {\rm{CH}}_2* + *` (quasi-equilibrated)
-  :math:`{\rm{CH}}_2* + {\rm{H}}* \leftrightarrow {\rm{CH}}_3* + *` (quasi-equilibrated)
-  :math:`{\rm{CH}}_3* + {\rm{H}}* \leftrightarrow {\rm{CH}}_{4,{\rm{gas}}} + 2*` (quasi-equilibrated)

Where \* denotes a Rh(111) site. For this example we need energies of
the following species:

-  |CO| (gas)
-  |H2| (gas)
-  |CH4| (gas)
-  |H2O| (gas)
-  |CO| (adsorbed)
-  |O| (adsorbed)
-  |C| (adsorbed)
-  |H| (adsorbed)
-  |CH| (adsorbed)
-  |OH| (adsorbed)
-  |CH2| (adsorbed)
-  |CH3| (adsorbed)
-  :math:`{\rm{C}}-{\rm{O}}` (transition-state)
-  :math:`{\rm{H}}-{\rm{OH}}` (transition-state)
-  :math:`{\rm{H}}-{\rm{C}}` (transition-state)
-  (111 slab)

Let's assume that we have computed the energies of these species on a
Rh(111) surface using some ab-initio method and stored them in a Python
dictionary:

.. code:: python

    abinitio_energies = {
             'CO_gas': -626.611970497,
             'H2_gas': -32.9625308725,
             'CH4_gas': -231.60983421,
             'H2O_gas': -496.411394229,
             'CO_111': -115390.445596,
             'C_111': -114926.212205,
             'O_111': -115225.106527,
             'H_111': -114779.038569,
             'CH_111': -114943.455431,
             'OH_111': -115241.861661,
             'CH2_111': -114959.776961,
             'CH3_111': -114976.7397,
             'C-O_111': -115386.76440668429,
             'H-OH_111': -115257.78796158083,
             'H-C_111': -114942.25042955727,
             'slab_111': -114762.254842,
             }

(in this case the energies were generated by Quantum Espresso)

Next, we need to decide on a choice of reference molecules. One simple
option for this system is to take hydrogen relative to |H2|, carbon
relative to |CH4|, and water relative to |H2O|. We will take all adsorption
energies relative to the clean (111) :math:`{\rm{Rh}}` slab.

.. code:: python

    ref_dict = {}
    ref_dict['H'] = 0.5*abinitio_energies['H2_gas']
    ref_dict['O'] = abinitio_energies['H2O_gas'] - 2*ref_dict['H']
    ref_dict['C'] = abinitio_energies['CH4_gas'] - 4*ref_dict['H']
    ref_dict['111'] = abinitio_energies['slab_111']

Now we can write a function to convert these "raw" energies to
"reference" energies. Note that we use the function
`ase.atoms.string2symbols` as a convenient way to get the composition from
the chemical formula.

.. code:: python

    from ase.atoms import string2symbols

    def get_formation_energies(energy_dict,ref_dict):
        formation_energies = {}
        for key in energy_dict.keys(): #iterate through keys
            E0 = energy_dict[key] #raw energy
            name,site = key.split('_') #split key into name/site
            if 'slab' not in name: #do not include empty site energy (0)
                if site == '111':
                    E0 -= ref_dict[site] #subtract slab energy if adsorbed
                #remove - from transition-states
                formula = name.replace('-','')
                #get the composition as a list of atomic species
                composition = string2symbols(formula)
                #for each atomic species, subtract off the reference energy
                for atom in composition:
                    E0 -= ref_dict[atom]
                #round to 3 decimals since this is the accuracy of DFT
                E0 = round(E0,3)
                formation_energies[key] = E0
        return formation_energies

We can check that the formation energies are reasonable (i.e. of order 1
eV):

.. code:: python

    formation_energies = get_formation_energies(abinitio_energies,ref_dict)

    for key in formation_energies:
        print key, formation_energies[key]

    >>
    >> OH_111 0.323
    >> H_111 -0.302
    >> C_111 1.727
    >> H2O_gas 0.0
    >> CH_111 0.965
    >> CO_111 0.943
    >> H2_gas 0.0
    >> C-O_111 4.624
    >> CO_gas 2.522
    >> O_111 0.597
    >> CH3_111 0.644
    >> CH4_gas 0.0
    >> CH2_111 1.125
    >> H-OH_111 0.878
    >> H-C_111 2.17
    >>

This looks pretty good. The energies of our reference species (:math:`{\rm{H}}_{2,\rm{gas}}`,
:math:`{\rm{CH}}_{4,\rm{gas}}`, and :math:`{\rm{H}}2{\rm{O}}_{\rm{gas}}`) are all 0 as expected, and all the numbers are
of order 1. Usually if something goes wrong then the numbers will be
similar to the raw DFT numbers (i.e. > 100 eV). We can also compute the
CO dissociation barrier as :math:`{\rm{E}}_{\rm{C-O}} - E_{\rm{CO}} = 3.68\,{\rm{eV}}`. This is pretty high,
but the surface is a close-packed (111) facet so this is not too
surprising.

Before making an input file we will want to get some vibrational
frequencies. Again, lets just assume that these have previously been
calculated by DFT and are stored in a Python dictionary as:

.. code:: python

    frequency_dict = {
                    'CO_gas': [2170],
                    'H2_gas': [4401],
                    'CH4_gas':[2917,1534,1534,3019,3019,3019,1306,
                               1306,1306],
                    'H2O_gas': [3657, 1595, 3756],
                    'CO_111': [60.8, 230.9, 256.0, 302.9, 469.9, 1747.3],
                    'C_111': [464.9, 490.0, 535.9],
                    'O_111': [359.5, 393.3, 507.0],
                    'H_111': [462.8, 715.9, 982.5],
                    'CH_111': [413.3, 437.5, 487.6, 709.6, 735.1, 3045.0],
                    'OH_111': [55, 340.9, 396.1, 670.3, 718.0, 3681.7],
                    'CH2_111': [55, 305.5, 381.3, 468.0, 663.4, 790.2, 1356.1,
                                2737.7, 3003.9],
                    'CH3_111': [55, 113.5, 167.4, 621.8, 686.0, 702.5, 1381.3,
                                1417.5, 1575.8, 3026.6, 3093.2, 3098.9],
                    'C-O_111': [],
                    'H-OH_111': [],
                    'H-C_111': []
                    }

Now we just need a function which will put everything together into a
tab-separated table with the appropriate headers. The following Python
function will do this for us:

.. code:: python


    def make_input_file(file_name,energy_dict,frequency_dict):

        #create a header
        header = '\t'.join(['surface_name','site_name',
                            'species_name','formation_energy',
                            'frequencies','reference'])

        lines = [] #list of lines in the output
        for key in energy_dict.keys(): #iterate through keys
            E = energy_dict[key] #raw energy
            name,site = key.split('_') #split key into name/site
            if 'slab' not in name: #do not include empty site energy (0)
                frequency = frequency_dict[key]
                if site == 'gas':
                    surface = None
                else:
                    surface = 'Rh'
                outline = [surface,site,name,E,frequency,'Input File Tutorial.']
                line = '\t'.join([str(w) for w in outline])
                lines.append(line)

        lines.sort() #The file is easier to read if sorted (optional)
        lines = [header] + lines #add header to top
        input_file = '\n'.join(lines) #Join the lines with a line break

        input = open(file_name,'w') #open the file name in write mode
        input.write(input_file) #write the text
        input.close() #close the file

        print 'Successfully created input file'

Now use this function to create the text file - in this case we call it
"energies.txt":

.. code:: python


    file_name = 'energies.txt'
    make_input_file(file_name,formation_energies,frequency_dict)

    >> Successfully created input file

You can view the input in a human-readable format by opening
energies.txt:

::

    surface_name    site_name   species_name    formation_energy    frequencies reference
    None    gas CH4 0.0 [2917, 1534, 1534, 3019, 3019, 3019, 1306, 1306, 1306]  Input File Tutorial.
    None    gas CO  2.522   [2170]  Input File Tutorial.
    None    gas H2  0.0 [4401]  Input File Tutorial.
    None    gas H2O 0.0 [3657, 1595, 3756]  Input File Tutorial.
    Rh  111 C   1.727   [464.9, 490.0, 535.9]   Input File Tutorial.
    Rh  111 C-O 4.624   []  Input File Tutorial.
    Rh  111 CH  0.965   [413.3, 437.5, 487.6, 709.6, 735.1, 3045.0] Input File Tutorial.
    Rh  111 CH2 1.125   [55, 305.5, 381.3, 468.0, 663.4, 790.2, 1356.1, 2737.7, 3003.9] Input File Tutorial.
    Rh  111 CH3 0.644   [55, 113.5, 167.4, 621.8, 686.0, 702.5, 1381.3, 1417.5, 1575.8, 3026.6, 3093.2, 3098.9] Input File Tutorial.
    Rh  111 CO  0.943   [60.8, 230.9, 256.0, 302.9, 469.9, 1747.3]  Input File Tutorial.
    Rh  111 H   -0.302  [462.8, 715.9, 982.5]   Input File Tutorial.
    Rh  111 H-C 2.17    []  Input File Tutorial.
    Rh  111 H-OH    0.878   []  Input File Tutorial.
    Rh  111 O   0.597   [359.5, 393.3, 507.0]   Input File Tutorial.
    Rh  111 OH  0.323   [55, 340.9, 396.1, 670.3, 718.0, 3681.7]    Input File Tutorial.

This particular example only creates input for a single surface, but it
is fairly easy to see how one could construct a for-loop over several
surfaces to create an input file with the energetics for multiple
surfaces. Alternatively if you keep your data stored in a spreadsheet it
should be possible to convert everything to a common reference and
export the spreadsheet as tab-separated values (remember to get the
header names right!).

In case we want to check that the input can be parsed correctly, we
could create a "dummy" ReactionModel and ask it to parse everything in.
Normally this won't be necessary since you will have an actual
ReactionModel that you want to use to test the parser (see the
:doc:`creating_a_microkinetic_model` tutorial), but it is included here for
reference.

.. code:: python

    #Test that input is parsed correctly
    from catmap.model import ReactionModel
    from catmap.parsers import TableParser
    rxm = ReactionModel()
    #The following lines are normally assigned by the setup_file
    #and are thus not usually necessary.
    rxm.surface_names = ['Rh']
    rxm.adsorbate_names = ['CO','C','O','H','CH','OH','CH2','CH3']
    rxm.transition_state_names = ['C-O','H-OH','H-C']
    rxm.gas_names = ['CO_g','H2_g','CH4_g','H2O_g']
    rxm.species_definitions = {'s':{'site_names':['111']}}
    #Now we initialize a parser instance (also normally done by setup_file)
    parser = TableParser(rxm)
    parser.input_file = file_name
    parser.parse()
    #All structured data is stored in species_definitions; thus we can
    #check that the parsing was successful by ensuring that all the
    #data in the input file was collected in this dictionary.
    for key in rxm.species_definitions:
        print key, rxm.species_definitions[key]

The output of this should contain all species in the model along with
their energies, frequencies, etc.

